---
layout: post
title:  "H-mode"
author: Roberts
---

# A quarter-century of H-mode studies
F Wagner (Max-Planck IPP)
## Introduction
* The most challenging aspect of the H-mode physics is the sudden disappearance of the edge turbulance whereas its driving forces-the gradients-increases.
* The most intriguing of these is that fluctuations themselves induce the flow, which acts back to its generating origin and annihilates the turbulence.
* This review concentrates mostly on the transition physics, describes one line of understanding the H-mode in more detail, recalls some of the older observations and summarizes the achievements in the H-mode for both tokamaks and stellarators.




# Quiescent double barrier high-confinement mode plasmas in the DIII-D tokamak
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.1355981
* ELMs can produce significant erosion in the divertor and can affect the beta limit and reduced core transport regions need for advanced tokamak operation.
* The quiescent H-mode regime, which is ELM-free and yet has good density and impurity control.
* In addition, we have demonstrated that an internal transport barrier can be produced and maintained inside the H-mode edge barrier for long periods of time (>3.5s or >25 energy confinement times $\tau_E$), yielding a quiescent double barrier regime.
* Density and impurity control in the quiescent H mode is possible because of the presence of an edge magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) oscillation, the edge harmonic oscillation, which enhances the edge particle transport while leaving the energy transport unaffected.

# Edge localized modes and pedestal: A model based on coupled peeling-ballooning modes
## Introduction
* The high confinement regime known as H-mode is a promising operational regime for a tomamak fusion device.
    * H-mode is characterized by the development of a transport barrier, which forms a "pedestal" in the density and temperature profiles, in the outer region of the plasma, just inside the magnetic separatrix.
* Steday-state operation in H-mode is generally accompanied by the bursty edge perturbations known as edge localized modes (ELMs).
    * <font color=blue>ELMs have the beneficial effect of transporting density and impurities across the H-mode pedestal region.</font>
    * <font color=red>However, large ELMs can produce high peak heat loads on the divertor plates which may be intolerable in a fusion reactor.
    * Perhaps even more important, ELMs limit the pedestal pressure gradient, and together with edge trasport, can directly limit the pressure and temperature at the top of the pedestal (i.e. the "pedestal height").</font>
    * Both theory-based transport models and experimental observation indicate a strong dependence of the overall confinement in the core of a magnetic fusion device on the <font color=magenta> pedestal height</font>.
    * <font color=blue>ELMs are short, repetitive perturbations of plasma in the edge region, which occur during H-mode and VH-mode operation and lead to particle and energy loss.</font>

# Edge stability of the ELM-free quiescent H-mode on DIII-D
DOI: http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/0029-5515/45/12/027

* In most cases, these high performance plasmas are accompanied by repetitive edge collapses, called ELMs, which produce large particle and heat pulses that propagate rapidly to the divertor strike plates.
* The quiescent H (QH)-mode is a demonstration that high performance plasmas with pedestal pressures equal to those in standard high confinement mode plasmas, yet with no ELMs, can be produced in stable, stationary-state conditions.

## The QH-mode pedestal and edge stability
* The QH edge was previously shown to have a pressure and pressure gradient very similar to ELMing H-mode, but it has different density and temperature gradients compared with ELMing H-mode, and these lead to a significantly lower calculated edge bootstrap current in QH. This lower edge current is a strong candidate for the stabilization of ELMs, a hypothesis supported by edge current pertubation experiments.
* The pressure profiles for the ELMing and QH phases are very similar, but the density is lower in the QH phase, and the temperatures are higher.
    * The density behaviour reflects the general trend that QH-mode is initiated from a ELMing phase as the density drops due to strong pumping.

<br />
<br />
&nbsp;
## Discussion and conclusions
*  The QH-mode is a roubst high-confinement mode of tokamak operation that exhibits no impulsive wall heat loading due to ELMs.

# Observation of ELM-free H-mode in the HL-2A tokamak
## Introduction
* These high-performance plasmas are often accompanied by edege-localized modes (ELMs). A large quantity of particles and important energy are ejected from the plasma into the divertor target plates during ELMs, in particular of type-I where the normalized ELM energy loss $\delta W_{ELM}/W_{ped}$ can sometimes  reach the level of 20% [3].
* ELM control techniques include pellet pacing [7], resonance magnetic perturbation (RMP) [8] and other external pertubation fields [9], and ELM mitigation using supersonic molecular beam injection (SMBI) has been experimentally demonstrated to be effective in HL-2A [10].

* Alternatively to these control techniques, increasing attention has been focused on specific stationary ELM-free H-mode regimes without large ELMS.
    * enhanced $D_{\alpha}$ H-mode in Alcator C-mode [11];
    * quiescent double-barrier H-mode in DIIID [12];
    * ELM-free stationary H-mode in ASDEX Upgrade [13];
    * ELM-free stationary H-mode in JET [14];
    * grassy ELM regime in JT-60 [15];
    * enhanced pedestal (EP) H-mode in NSTX [16];

* One of thr main features in the quiescent H-mode (QH-mode) is the presence of an edge harmonic oscillation (EHO), which has been observed near the separatrix in several devices [13-15, 17]. <font color=blue>Attractively, it has been observed that EHO can enhance the edge particle transport and keep the edge plasma below the boundary of the peeling-ballooning instability</font>, which is thought to be responsible for ELMs[18 19], and sustain the staionary edge plasma.


## Identification of the EHO
* As observed in other tokamaks [13-15,17], the QH-mode is accompanied by the <font color=red>EHO</font>, which is <font color=blue>an electromagnetic mode localized in the edge pedestal region</font>, and is one of the most characteristic features of the QH-mode.

* EHO can be used for density and impurity controls[37,38].
* In QH-mode plasmas, it is usually observed that an ELM replaces an EHO when the electron density increases[38].

<br/>
<br/>
# New Steady-State Quiescent High-Confinement Plasma in an Experimental Advanced Superconducting Tokamak
PRL 114, 055001 (2015)

<br/>
# Confinement studies in L and H-type Asdex discharges
PPCF 26, 49-63 (1984)
* As indicated above, the critical parameter for the development of the H-regime seems to be the edge electron temperature (or the plasma resistivity).
* The H-phase is repeatedly interrupted by a new MHD phenomenon which severely limits the plasma temperatures and $\beta$ values attainable during the high-confinement mode.
* To summarize, we conclude that ELMs are MHD surface modes. Current density distributions corresponding to H-discharge temperature profiles are expected to be unstable to current driven (kink or tearing) modes with a resonance surface close to the outer edge of the strong gradient region.

# ELM-Free stationbary H-mode plasmas in the ASDEX Upgrade tokamak
* Much of the confinement improvement in the high-confinement mode ('H-mode') in divertor tokamaks orginates from the presence of an edge transport barrier ('ETB') which leads to steep edge pressure gradients and high pressure at the top of the barrier ('pedestal' region).  This is a favourable boundary condition for achieving a high temperature in the plasma core, especially for 'stiff' profiles, i.e. profiles near a lower limit of the gradient length $L_T = T/\nabla T$. The high edge pressure gradient also leads to destabilization of edge localized modes ('ELMs'), which can present very high peak heat loads to the divertor [1] that might not be tolerable for a fusion reactor-size machine. On the other hand, particle losses associated with ELMs allow for stationary plasma density and benign impurity concentrations in the hot core.
* ELM-free H-modes are typically characterized by continuously rising plasma density and radiated power, and are terminated by a radiative collapse or a large ELM.
* It is therefore important to identify an H-mode regime with large pedestal pressure and without large ELMs but with some form of particle transport accross the barrier region.
*


# Characteristics of dithering cycles during the L-I-H transition on Expderimental Advanced Superconducting Tokamak (EAST), T. Zhang, Physics Letter A. 2013
* It is believed that the confinement improvement in H-mode is due to suppression or reduction of turbulent transport.
* There are clear experimental evidences for a fast reduction in the level of edge turbulence during the L-H transition.
* The earlist theories attributed the turbulence suppression and the transition to the increase of the radial electric field ($E_r$) and its associated $E_r \times B$ drift (mean flow).
* More recently, the predator–prey model [13,14] reveals a complex interaction be- tween zonal flows (ZFs), turbulence and the mean flow. As dis- cussed in Ref. [15], the L–H transition threshold power is lowered by including the evolution of ZFs self-consistently. When the ZFs are incorporated in a L–H transition model [14], the predator–prey type competition between turbulence and ZFs will result in a limit cycle oscillation (LCO) phase where turbulent fluctuation level is modulated by a low frequency $E_r$ oscillation.
* An **intermediate regime** (IM-mode) was found on DIII-D between the L- and H-modes [18,19].
    *  The IM-mode is characterized by edge periodic instability bursts which clamped the density but allowed improvement of the thermal confinement resulting in the gradual increase of temperature and no change of density.
    *  Recent observation in AUG, showed that an intermediate phase (I phase) usually occurred when the heating power is close to the L-H transition power theshold. In the I phase, the $E_r \times B$ flow and turbulence level were periodically modulated at a frequency of 2-4 kHz and the limit-cycle behavior between geodesic acoustic mode (GAM) with frequency ~19kHZ and the back-ground turbulence was observed during the enhanced turbulence state[20].
    *  An oscillation with a limit-cycle behavior between ZF with frequency ∼2 kHz and background turbulence preceding L–H transition was also observed in DIII-D [21]
    *  On EAST toka- mak, a quasi-periodic Er oscillation with a frequency about 4 kHz and a modulation in edge turbulence preceding the L–H transition have been observed at marginal input power [24].
*


# Edge stability and transport control with resonant magnetic perturbationsin collisionless tokamak plasmas
by Todd E. Evans (GA) in Nat. Phys.
* A ubiquitous feature of these high edge pressure, steady-state, H-mode tokamak plasmas is repetitive instabilities known as 'edge-localized modes' (ELMs).
    * These instabilities are a class of ideal magneto-hydrodynamic modes produced in a high-pressure-gradient region at the plasma edge (known as the 'pedestal') where pressure-gradient-driven 'ballooning' modes can couple to current-density-driven 'peeling' modes.
    * On the basis of an extensive multi-machine ELM datebase, it is well known that the impulsive energy released during an ELM increases with decreasing electron pedestal collisionality $\nu_e^{*} \propto n_e^{ped}(T_e^{ped})^{-2}$.