---
layout: post
title:  "LHW"
author: Roberts
---

## Introduction
* Lower Hybrid wavs (LHW) have the attractive property that they damp efficiently via Landau resonance at relatively low electron temparture on "tail electrons" at parallel phase speeds of approximately $$(2.5 - 3) x v_{te}$$, where $$v_{te}=(2T_e/m_e)^2$$ is the electron themal speed.
* As a consequence they can be used to drive current in the outer half of tokamak plasmas in order to broaden the current profile and access and optimize improved energy confinement regimes.
* Several advanced reactor designs as well as the ITER device incorporate off-axis lower hybrid current drive (LHCD) in order to control the shear reversal point and maintain high bootstrap current fraction.
* It is necessary to maintain edge densities that are low enough to allow LH waves to penetrate to the high temperature region of the plasma at $$r/a \geq 0.6$$ and drive off-axis current.
* In order to achieve the highest fidelity possible in these calculations we have taken advantage of a parallel computing framework, the Integrated Plasma Simulator (IPS), where the free boundary plasma evolution is done using the TSC code and the driven LH current density profiles are computed using either the LSC code or the GENRAY ray tracing code and Fokker Plank code CQL3D.
	* Relative to the LSC code, GENRAY affords a more detailed description of the LH launcher including its finite poloidal extent.
	* And CQL3D allows for an accurate description of $$2-D(v_{\bot},v_{\parallel})$$ velocity space effects in the wave damping.
	* Both of which are known to be very important for LH wave propagation and absorption.


### Reference
[1 P.T. Bonoli, et al. Integrated Plasma Simulation of Lower Hybrid Current Profile Control in Tokamaks](https://www-internal.psfc.mit.edu/research/alcator/pubs/iaea/2012/Bonoli_IAEA12-paper_THP6-11-v2.pdf)